---
layout: post
title: "Cracking Church Numerals"
author: Chris Reuter"
--- 

# Alonzo Church and Alan Turing

Alonzo Church was a famous mathematician. He worked with Alan Turing on the Entscheidungsproblem. The Entscheidungsproblem is the problem of figuring out whether a program will halt or not. Turing developed his famous Turing machines to help solve this problem. Turing machines are computers that operate on an infinite tape of ones and zeros. Turing Machines were necessary because it allowed Turing to express computation rigorously. Church developed another way of expressing computation called lambda calculus.

# Lambda Calculus

Lambda expressions are way of representing functions.

    λx.x

    f(x) = x

The two expressions above are equivalent. They both return their input. This what's called an identity function. To evaluate a lambda expression you replace the variable with what is being evaluated for.

    λx.x
    ((λx.x) 1)
    1

Here 1 replaces x. 

    λx.λy.y

The above function has two inputs. 

    λx.λy.y

    (((λx.λy.y) 2) 1)
    ((λy.y))
    1
    
    (((λx.λy.y) 3) 4)
    ((λy.y) 4)
    4

As you can see this function drops it's first argument.

    λx.x+3
    ((λx.x+10) 3)
    (3+10)
    13

You can include other operators, like plus, in lambda expressions. 

    λx.λy.xxy
    ((λx.λy.yxx) +2 ) 1)
    ((λy.y(+2+2)) 1)
    (1+2+2)
    5

For an expression to be "pure" lambda calculus in can only include bound variables. When an variable is preceded by a λ it is said to be bound. Below are some famous pure lambda calculus expressions, which are also known as combinators.
    
    λx.λy.x
    The K combinator always returns the same thing regardless of it's second input.

    λx.x
    The I combinator always returns it's first input.
   
    λx.λy.λz.x(zy)
    The C combinator swaps it second and third input.

    
## Church Encoding

Church first came up with a way of representing integers in lambda calculus.

    λf.λx.x    represents zero
    λf.λx.fx   represents one
    λf.λx.ffx  represents two
    λf.λx.fffx represents three

This allowed Church to begin to represent computation in lambda calculus. Unpacking a church encoded number is fairly simple.

    λf.λx.ffx
    (((λf.λx.ffx) 1+ ) 0)
    (λx.(1+1+x) 0)
    (1+1+0)
    2

Church then went about doing operations on these representations of numbers. The first combinator he found was the successor function which given a church representation of a number returns the next church number.

    successor = λn.λf.λx.f (n f x)
  
Our expectation is that applying λf.λx.x to the successor function should give us λf.λx.f(x).

    (λn.λf.λx.f (n f x)) λf.λx.x
    (λf.λx.f (((λf.λx.x) f) x))
    (λf.λx.f ((λx.x) x)
    λf.λx.f(x)
    
Using this successor function you can then do addition.

    addition = λmλn. n successor m
    addition = λmλn. m f (n f x)  by substituting the successor language

It works by applying the successor function the first number of times on the second number. 

    one =  λf.λx.f(x)
    two =  λf.λx.f(f(x))
    ((λm.λn.m f (n f x) one ) two)
    ((λm.λn.m f (n f x) λf.λx.fx) two)
    ((λn.(λf.λx.f(x)) f (n f x)) two)
    ((λf.λx.f(x)) f ((λf.λx.ffx f x))
    ((λf.λx.f(x)) f ((λx.ffx x)))
    ((λf.λx.f(x)) f (f(f(x)))
    (λx.f(x) f(f(x)))
    f(f(f(x))) which equals three

Church went on to further develop his encodings. The Church-Turing hypothesis states that both lambda calculus and Turing machines are computationally equivalent.